# BLE Central PHY Example Walkthrough

## Introduction

In this tutorial, the ble_phy central example code for the ESP32 is reviewed. This example aims at understanding how to establish connections on preferred PHY and changing LE PHY once the connection is established. The code implements a BLE Central PHY, which establishes a connection on LE 1M PHY and switches to LE 2M PHY once the connection is established. The Central then performs GATT read operation against a specified peer and disconnects once this is completed.

## Includes

This example is located in the examples folder of the ESP-IDF under the [bluetooth/nimble/ble_phy/phy_cent/main](../main). The [main.c](../main/main.c) file located in the main folder contains all the functionality that we are going to review. The header files contained in [main.c](../main/main.c) are:

```c
#include "esp_log.h"
#include "nvs_flash.h"

/* BLE */
#include "nimble/nimble_port.h"
#include "nimble/nimble_port_freertos.h"
#include "host/ble_hs.h"
#include "host/util/util.h"
#include "console/console.h"
#include "services/gap/ble_svc_gap.h"
#include "phy_cent.h"

```

These `includes` are required for the FreeRTOS and underlying system components to run, including the logging functionality and a library to store data in non-volatile flash memory. We are interested in `“nimble_port.h”`, `“nimble_port_freertos.h”`, `"ble_hs.h"` and `“ble_svc_gap.h”`, `“phy_cent.h”` which expose the BLE APIs required to implement this example.

* `nimble_port.h`: Includes the declaration of functions required for the initialization of the nimble stack. 
* `nimble_port_freertos.h`: initializes and enables nimble host task.
* `ble_hs.h`: Defines the functionalities to handle the host event 
* `ble_svc_gap.h`:
* `phy_cenr.h`: 

## Main Entry Point

The program’s entry point is the app_main() function:

```c
void
app_main(void)
{
    int rc;
    /* Initialize NVS — it is used to store PHY calibration data */
    esp_err_t ret = nvs_flash_init();
    if  (ret == ESP_ERR_NVS_NO_FREE_PAGES || ret == ESP_ERR_NVS_NEW_VERSION_FOUND) {
        ESP_ERROR_CHECK(nvs_flash_erase());
        ret = nvs_flash_init();
    }
    ESP_ERROR_CHECK(ret);

    nimble_port_init();
    /* Configure the host. */
    ble_hs_cfg.reset_cb = blecent_on_reset;
    ble_hs_cfg.sync_cb = blecent_on_sync;
    ble_hs_cfg.store_status_cb = ble_store_util_status_rr;

    /* Initialize data structures to track connected peers. */
    rc = peer_init(MYNEWT_VAL(BLE_MAX_CONNECTIONS), 64, 64, 64);
    assert(rc == 0);

    /* Set the default device name. */
    rc = ble_svc_gap_device_name_set("blecent-phy");
    assert(rc == 0);

    /* XXX Need to have template for store */
    ble_store_config_init();

    nimble_port_freertos_init(blecent_host_task);

}

```

The main function starts by initializing the non-volatile storage library. This library allows to save key-value pairs in flash memory and is used by some components such as the Wi-Fi library to save the SSID and password:

```c
esp_err_t ret = nvs_flash_init();
if (ret == ESP_ERR_NVS_NO_FREE_PAGES || ret == ESP_ERR_NVS_NEW_VERSION_FOUND) {
    ESP_ERROR_CHECK(nvs_flash_erase());
    ret = nvs_flash_init();
}
ESP_ERROR_CHECK( ret );
```

## BT Controller and Stack Initialization
The main function calls `nimble_port_init()` to initialize BT Controller and nimble stack. This function initializes the BT controller by first creating a BT controller configuration structure named `esp_bt_controller_config_t` with default settings generated by the `BT_CONTROLLER_INIT_CONFIG_DEFAULT()` macro. The BT controller implements the Host Controller Interface (HCI) on the controller side, the Link Layer (LL), and the Physical Layer (PHY). The BT Controller is invisible to the user applications and deals with the lower layers of the BLE stack. The controller configuration includes setting the BT controller stack size, priority, and HCI baud rate. With the settings created, the BT controller is initialized and enabled with the `esp_bt_controller_init()` and `esp_bt_controller_enable()` functions:

```c
esp_bt_controller_config_t config_opts = BT_CONTROLLER_INIT_CONFIG_DEFAULT();
ret = esp_bt_controller_init(&config_opts);
```

Next, the controller is enabled in BLE Mode. 

```c
ret = esp_bt_controller_enable(ESP_BT_MODE_BLE);
```
>The controller should be enabled in `ESP_BT_MODE_BTDM` if you want to use the dual mode (BLE + BT).
 
There are four Bluetooth modes supported:

1. `ESP_BT_MODE_IDLE`: Bluetooth not running
2. `ESP_BT_MODE_BLE`: BLE mode
3. `ESP_BT_MODE_CLASSIC_BT`: BT Classic mode
4. `ESP_BT_MODE_BTDM`: Dual mode (BLE + BT Classic)

After the initialization of the BT controller, the nimble stack, which includes the common definitions and APIs for both BT Classic and BLE, is initialized by using `esp_nimble_init()`:

```c
esp_err_t esp_nimble_init(void)
{

#if !SOC_ESP_NIMBLE_CONTROLLER
    /* Initialize the function pointers for OS porting */
    npl_freertos_funcs_init();

    npl_freertos_mempool_init();

    if(esp_nimble_hci_init() != ESP_OK) {
        ESP_LOGE(NIMBLE_PORT_LOG_TAG, "hci inits failed\n");
        return ESP_FAIL;
    }
        
    /* Initialize default event queue */
    ble_npl_eventq_init(&g_eventq_dflt);

    os_msys_init();

    void ble_store_ram_init(void); 
    /* XXX Need to have template for store */
    ble_store_ram_init();
#endif

    /* Initialize the host */
    ble_hs_init();
    return ESP_OK;
}

```

The host is configured by creating a `ble_hs_cfg` structure and setting up the callbacks for Stack-reset, Stack-sync, and Storage status

```c
 ble_hs_cfg.reset_cb = blecent_on_reset;
 ble_hs_cfg.sync_cb = blecent_on_sync;
 ble_hs_cfg.store_status_cb = ble_store_util_status_rr;
 ```
 
 
Further Data Structures are created and initialized to track connected peers using `peer_init()`. This function creates memory buffers to generate the memory pools like `peer_pool`, `peer_svc_pool`, `peer_chr_pool`, and `peer_dsc_pool`.
```c
 rc = peer_init(MYNEWT_VAL(BLE_MAX_CONNECTIONS), 64, 64, 64);
 
```


Next, the main function calls `ble_svc_gap_device_name_set()` to set the default device name. "blecent_phy" is passed as the default device name to this function.
```c
rc = ble_svc_gap_device_name_set("blecent-phy");
```

main function calls  `ble_store_config_init()` to configure the host by setting up the storage callbacks which handle the read, write, and deletion of security material.
```c
/* XXX Need to have a template for store */
    ble_store_config_init();
```


The main function ends by creating a task where nimble will run using `nimble_port_freertos_init()`. This enables the nimble stack by using `esp_nimble_enable()`. 
```c
nimble_port_freertos_init(blecent_host_task);

```
`esp_nimble_enable()` create a task where the nimble host will run. It is not strictly necessary to have a separate task for the nimble host, but since something needs to handle the default queue, it is easier to create a separate task.















